---
title: "product management hats"
description: "A comprehensive if somewhat abstract description of the different roles of product management."
created: 2022-08-20
updated: 2023-02-05
tags: ["essay", "product management"]
---

I care a lot about product management. Learning, thinking, and talking about it, as well as doing it. It calls on traits I value: being a generalist, communicating well and talking to people, and a great mix of rationality & intuition… I care about it too much by the standards I apply to myself. I got attached to the label itself at some point along the way.

So I wanted to deconstruct what it is exactly I mean by product management and what it is I like doing. It can also serve as an evolving reference for my product management practice. I'll do it through a series of hats, each a different lens that, taken together, should describe the job well.

It will feel idealized, but it's grounded in my experience as a founder or first product person in small companies, which will differ from others. Still, it's different from a job listing. These roles are distributed, sometimes among a product management team and sometimes among people who are not formally doing product management.

I'm aiming for comprehensiveness over depth at the risk of being overly abstract. But I'd rather focus on the why and what rather than the how, which is rarely the issue and always an ad-hoc combination of parts of a plentiful jungle of frameworks.

## As mental model making

The cleanest way to start describing the job of product management is that it's to build and maintain mental models of everything around and inside the product. It's taking incredibly complex realities and trying to fit them in neat shareable descriptions with some explanatory power. You can then operationalize them for planning and predicting. Most of the time is spent on this prep work for everything else which naturally follows.

There are a few key themes of things you have to model. Through a constant ethnographic study of your customers and their craft, you create personas, aim to understand how they work, their problems, and how they correspond to what you can offer them. You use business strategy and marketing frameworks to think critically about the market, where it's going, where you might fit, and what you can do better with your unique advantages or your novel perspective. Through interacting with engineering teams, you better understand the underlying technologies and model development efforts, costs, and unknowns.

What's lovely about this is that you're stealing all of these from other disciplines. You'll always have things to learn or to get better at and people to talk to. The job is to build representations of complex, non-trivial realities that are hard to work on in the raw and then get to where they can be explained and discussed with relevant parties, whatever support or techniques works. At level 0, this involves being a living repository of that information, but then you start creating artifacts and knowledge bases. Your mental models, a simplification and projection made to be actionable and useful, won't be good enough the first time. You'll put significant work into thinking of ways to validate it and executing these through whatever experiment is fit.

Only _then_ do these all feed into the core models product managers are responsible for. They vary but usually cover the following. First, a product vision or an explanation of where you want to end up. A product strategy, as in an ordered step-by-step plan to clear obstacles to get to the vision by serving a gradually expanding set of customers and needs. And then any roadmap of any level of abstraction describing a concrete motion to go through that plan.

There is a way of thinking about product management that is about visionaries, where you start from these items first. Some schopenhauerian imposition of the will - a product leader knows what they want, and they're going to shape the world in that image. I'm more of a fan of thinking in reverse. Exceptional products are exceptional mental models, a unique and novel insight about the world or how a new technology relates to it, from which what product you should build and all the details downstream become apparent.

More prosaically and day-to-day, the most straightforward instance of building mental models is building vocabularies. I care a lot about naming things. It has immediate benefits, as a shared language means things like documentation, talking to your customers, or internal discussions are 200% easier. If it gets a name, it doesn't have to be constantly re-explained, internally or to the outside, and you can get to the productive bits. Like a design system or reusable APIs, you're building primitives to stand on to get to higher levels. It's not that easy; you want to name complex things. As the saying goes, it's one of the two hard things in computer science.

The second most straightforward instance is building taxonomies (and naming the leaves). For example, a firehose of unqualified product feedback and usage data is hard to exploit; the first step is to organize it into coherent buckets that will take a life of their own. Ways to use your products or jobs-to-be-done are taxonomies. You want to avoid assuming you already know what you'll find in these and come in with a preset model; you want to build the taxonomy as you go and refine it over time. As with many product management things, it's highly iterative.

Building these mental models requires leaps of abstraction and the ability to separate the signal from the noise. The most glorious feeling of managing a product is realizing that issues that you've been seeing separately for a long time can be considered symptoms of a single cause or otherwise unified under a single model. The retrospectively obvious was there all along; it only took an update to the mental model to see it. Getting there means deliberate efforts to reduce everything to first principles and root causes rather than stop along the way.

The archetypal example of having to deconstruct things is getting product feedback. Users or stakeholders will tell you to fix or add something; sometimes, you simply do it, and that's fine. But more than just doing triage is needed. Often, it's a case of Ford's "If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses." In fact, you don't need to ask. People will intuitively turn their problems into solutions, losing some precious information. You'll need to make a point to understand what's behind what they're asking for. What it reveals about their preferences, needs, or ways they use the product. Elegant solutions lie there, a little beyond. The construction of the proper mental model is how you get there. It means a structuralist approach, where you get enough symptoms or surface-level facts to infer the underlying infrastructure hidden behind layers of second and third-order effects. Once you have that model, exploring the solution space becomes much easier, and you get novel ideas.

To build these models, you gather information. Half the battle is creating channels to get relevant information. You must curate them gradually and ensure you are not biasing a particular view. For example, you may be only talking to your power users and forgetting the people who aren't using your product yet. Then it's time to get out of the building and seek communities of potential users.

The information varies in nature. It can be purely qualitative by talking to people or doing research, quantitative by looking at hard data such as product analytics, or somewhere in between, like doing a thematic analysis of 100s of customer feedback or support tickets. You create rituals, so that stuff you aren't actively looking for still reaches you. And you build tools you can use to dive deep into a specific topic or issue when needed.
You look at different industries or products that have tackled similar problems, try to understand how they did it, and apply a bit of lateral thinking to work out the implications of their solutions to your context. Everything looks different from close up, but if you abstract things into models, you can see commonality.

Often, these mental models are under your nose, just not formally described or consolidated. Early startups' decision-making is intuitive and founder-led, with quick feedback loops and fast-changing models. At some point, just having a scribe write things down becomes beneficial. The first months of a product manager, when they're yet to be an expert on the customers or the market, are often spent talking to who knows better, internally and externally, trying to fit everything together, importing existing models, and documenting them explicitly. It takes quite a bit of listening skills and empathy, as well. Merging multiple world views can be challenging.

## As systems thinking

Once you have models, you need to build relationships. Try to fit them into a more extensive holistic system that describes your product competently. Whatever models you have will interact in non-trivial ways, but you have to find structured flows and coherent narratives you can organize the product work around.

A lot of this can be numbers-based. You know that this feature usage here by this type of customer impacts this conversion rate there and impacts the bottom line in that manner. You have a CAC and an LTV in mind for a given customer segment, a rough estimate of efforts needed to implement something that will impact the experience of that customer segment with the product. Value, effort, and money have flows that you can map as black boxes of inputs and outputs. At the very least, you'll learn a lot attempting to map this. The answers you achieve are rarely exact. Sometimes you can A/B test something to scientific precision or do a proper root cause analysis, but generally, it's more about valuable heuristics.

A very important skill is the ability to "zoom in and zoom out ."You need to maintain the threads between a very granular feature or work increment, what it unlocks, why we think it's important, and how that fits in a bigger (necessarily fuzzy) multi-year strategy. It pans a broad spectrum across timescales and levels of abstraction and is a big part of what makes product management challenging and stimulating. Steve Jobs' levels of attention to detail and precision on the subject matter need to cohabit with big-picture views. You must hold all of these in your mind and be able to present and communicate them coherently.

You also have to know where to direct your attention and work at any given time. Product management is always spread thin, and "what should I work on" has few apparent answers. A lot of the work is speculatory, and tasks in isolation are hard to gauge. You have to juggle these different timelines, and your mental models should be "suitably detailed" - specific questions must be answered just-in-time when some engineering time is available or some marketing opportunity opens up. Appropriately directing your efforts means understanding the product system well enough and what you'll get for pushing what lever.

## As nay-saying

Product management often has to bring some perspective and context to the table when there is a drift in the product direction. There can be many reasons for that. A common one is trying to please everyone and getting your product pulled apart in many directions to try and satisfy multiple contradictory customer needs. The person who chases two rabbits catches neither. It happens a lot in sales or customer support-driven companies. These stakeholders have tactical considerations to win deals or satisfy customers but might not have a more strategic perspective on the product. A PM must actively maintain a bit of deliberateness, a coherent _design_. Always start with the why and then proceed from a top-down motion into features & increments with a goal in mind. Product management is also responsible for mixing that attitude with the necessary continuous iterative improvement and potentially purely technical "invisible" work.

Maintaining coherence is bound to make some people unhappy, or you must do it more strictly. You can neatly illustrate it by saying that "product strategy is about saying no." Everything is worth it in the abstract; you can always find reasons why any feature is helpful, and someone will find them. But the world of software, which allows for fast, seemingly costless changes, is a world of opportunity costs. You have to make sure you say no so your product work is focused on the most crucial opportunity available to move your product mission forward.

The worst state to be in is to hear "that's already in the backlog" for about everything you can imagine that's tangentially related to what your product does. Before you know it, your product does everything, has a configuration page the size of the moon, and you cannot articulate its value proposition to any prospective user. A fate Salesforce or Microsoft might be OK with for the greater good of expanding the total addressable market but deadly to any startup needing a clean value proposition to get adopted.

The role is to define clear borders & criteria for the inclusion of product work. Market positioning is essential in that respect; it provides a good test. You should be able to explain what your (even direct) competitors do better than you and even be comfortable sending users to them. That's also an attitude that might be counter-intuitive; the default mode is "we're better," but clear thinking about your product and its place means you understand the tradeoffs.

## As outcome-driven culture building

In the same vein of going against the grain: features or work can get a life of its own. Your backlog & features, the output, means to an end, becomes the outcome, the end itself. It's an inevitable byproduct of getting things done and deeply focusing on them. An engineer's work may be done when a feature is done, but a PM's work can only be done when a specific outcome is achieved, an obstacle is removed, and a problem is solved. It pairs well with the versatility and cross-discipline nature of product management: don't make excuses; whatever prevents the product from reaching the desired outcome is your problem, and you should work on that.

"A sense of responsibility" and "the buck stops with you attitude" might go on a PM job listing. Still, it goes beyond the personal level and is primarily an organization-level question. Product management is responsible for setting up a culture of ownership and spreading it. Everyone in the extended product team should feel empowered and responsible. No one should think their job is done because it's "technically done" but didn't achieve much or what was intended.

Generalized ownership is personally fulfilling for everyone, as nobody likes being just a cog, but it's also the most efficient way of creating products. When everyone is conscious of why they do something because the PM articulates the why and underlying logic, they tend to build the right thing, have better ideas, and contribute their unique perspective on achieving the goal.

One of the ways to do it is through OKR-like approaches. If you can rally people behind a "north star metric" that is a proxy for a product goal, that's a good start. You know your job is done when you have managed to move the needle one way or the other. It's most easily done in big corps, with a big enough product to slice it in tranches and have squads focus on one metric. Measurability is important, but more fundamentally, it's about always focusing on a combination of user-centrism and business outcomes rather than internal artifacts or intermediates.

It's about closing the feedback loop, ensuring the impact of what the team is doing is judged against the proper criteria so that the product can improve correctly. What does it do for the user? Are they better off with this new release? How is that contributing to the overall mission? It sounds trite, but teams often collectively lose the plot in the complicated business of making software. It's a price to pay to do anything: you break down a big problem into small pieces, and before you know it, you lose view of why you did it. As an engineer by training, I have my own bias, for example, around the subconscious idea of "if it was hard to do, it's probably valuable," including when something 10x easier to do might deliver equal value. Depending on culture, these personal biases, whatever they are, sometimes get blown up and contagious.

A PM's job is often to bring context or perspective and get back to what matters when the team gets too much in the weeds and loses the plot. Product management has an entire toolbox and agenda of steering that in the right direction to try and prevent people on the product team from going on sidequests that are only tangentially related to making the product better.

## As aligning

Once you've got your mental models, you have to peddle them around. This serves a double function.

First, validating these models. You might have ideas, but as a jack-of-all-trades-master-of-none, the engineers will out-engineer you, the designers will out-design you, the salespeople will out-sell you, the users will out-us... You get the idea. If you've come to a conclusion that resonates alarmingly badly with a primary person of interest, you've probably goofed, and that's an important data point you should update everything with.

Second, sharing these models is how you do anything. An interesting part of product management, particularly apparent coming from software engineering management, is that it usually has its separate hierarchy somewhere in the corner. It can't do much by itself. Owners of the actual levers, like engineering or marketing, will listen to you as much as you can convince them of what's good. This is more interesting than frustrating. It has its bad moments, but ideally, it keeps you honest and efficient - your good mental models are the most convincing and the easiest to share - incentives are well aligned in that regard: if you can't do your job indirectly, you probably aren't doing it well.

Anything related to a mental model misalignment is on product management, and they are a dime a dozen. For example, let's say there is a mismatch between the mental model of the users, as mapped by the designer, and the mental model of the developers implementing a given feature. The resulting work will be very confusing to the end-user at best, or the feature will get no usage because users will miss the point. Or it could cause regular bugs as what users think is standard was considered edge-case material or out of scope viewed by engineering. An entire class of these problems might get flagged as something other than product management not doing its job. A deficit in product management, I find, can be sneaky.

I like this way of describing a PM, slightly reworded from John Cutler: first, they must have a high **sensitivity to incoherence**. Meaning they must spot these misalignments. Maybe the stated company objective or priority is not getting worked concretely by the team. Perhaps the architecture the dev team is thinking about represents an overinvestment of effort compared to how certain we are about the value it will deliver. Second, PMs must have a high **urgency to resolve**. Some people might see the incoherence but either thrive in the resulting chaos or be resigned to the idea of inefficiency caused by working in multiple contradictory directions. In the other quadrant, some people are pragmatists, fixers that want to fix but might not necessarily be thinking strategically and have the holistic view to spot the incoherences. The combination of both makes someone good at product management.

In my mind, alignment is also where product managers can get a justifiable lousy rep. Big companies with giant bloated bureaucracies have many product managers acting strictly as relays and parroting information without added value. In effect, they patch leaks and extinguish fires caused by broken communication lines and culture without fixing the underlying cause.

## As cheerleading & evangelization

One of the most important mental models you can share is your ideal product and where you want to end up eventually. The idea is to describe it in the most vivid colors possible. You can even get to a high-fidelity prototype. The role of having a product vision, and a strategy to get there, is two-fold.

First, it's useful for external perception. Al Ries' and Jack Trout's famous book about positioning has the idea that some companies would be better off if they just scrapped their advertising and ran the internal strategy PowerPoint instead. In product companies, you should be able to roll out the product strategy more or less unchanged, and it should speak for itself. Strong mental models make compelling narratives. Strong meaning well, researched, and well-formulated.

There is a push-pull with marketing people on these subjects, as they're the primary users of these outputs of product management, which can neatly be turned into content marketing. They also have, through their activities, significant insights into the market or prospective customers. The reverse engineering of other companies' narratives provides valuable inputs for building your mental models.

For communicating inside the company, you have two critical things to juggle as a product manager. First, depending on personalities, many people need a strategy as input. They want a narrative to make sense of their actions, a coherent direction, and a plan. I find that these people often get burned out or quit jobs when there is a product management deficit, even in an otherwise perfectly healthy company. "We're making the product better" or "we're making sure we can handle more customers" aren't satisfactory narratives, for how often they're all you might hear. Product management is in charge of sense-making in a more concrete way than the level the CEO or other executives carrying the general company vision might be at.

The other part is managing the unknown and reassuring people that they are less tolerant of it. Innovation is part of the startup stance; you can't be 100% sure of what you're building before the fact. But that makes the need to know and articulate what the product stands for and where the limits of the flexibility and acceptable pivots are.
Often, it's about communicating your learnings. Something changed in the roadmap because something was realized that broke priors. You have to explain it, or else at face value, it just looks like you're making things up as you go along, which should only be partly true.

These parts of the product management role can make or break a team's morale and general well-being.

## As cheap science

When you are making your mental models, you make many assumptions. You label them all with a confidence level. At the start, confidence will be incredibly low. Someone would have done what you're trying to do if it weren't. Product management is about increasing the confidence levels of your modelization over time.

You do that through experiments, a central concept of product management. You have a hypothesis, you test it, and you learn. You get an idea in front of an expert and see how it resonates. Imagine a landing page and see if you can present some yet unrealized feature you're thinking of compellingly. You're trying to refine your assumptions and enhance your confidence levels that your mental models are, in fact, meaningful.

Beyond the experiments you can do on your own is the world of the Minimum Viable Product - which extends downwards from an entire product to minor features. It's the art of finding the smallest amount of product work necessary to validate an assumption you've made. There is cool resourcefulness to it; engineers and designers are often very good at it; as a PM, you are the one who has to make sure it happens by constantly prodding along the line of "do we need this?" or "would this radically different, simpler and temporary way of doing it be worth it to validate the assumption a bigger work usefulness is riding on?".

To make it happen, you also have to frame it right. This is what we're thinking; this is how sure we are and why; this is what we're validating. Product assumptions must follow all the basics of the scientific method; you have to find some way to make them falsifiable so you can design experiments to match. They need predictive power to be helpful, and predictions are verifiable.

## As risk minimization

In a closely related view popularized by Marty Cagan, product management is responsible for minimizing risks before something is worked on. I like that model a lot in startups. Often considered as upside machines, as baby unicorns, startups are more about constrained resources and doing the most with the least. You must be supremely prudent because any mistake, including any product management fuckup, is death. In contrast, your friendly neighborhood big corp can spend dozens of millions on a failed project with it barely registering. This is probably not the dimension Google's PMs are best at; for what incentives would they have to be? It's an unintuitive conception of risk where the most significant risk is the opportunity cost of making a product nobody wants or not doing anything. Which, in the default state of startups with a finite runway, doesn't end well.

Cagan lists different categories of risk that make a useful taxonomy:

- Value risk, or does this _actually_ bring value to the users
- Usability risk, or can we make it easy enough to use
- Feasibility risk, or do we have the technology to make it real
- Business viability risk, or is this compatible with our business model and capabilities

I also like this view, particularly if you scope down the role of product management on any given feature or project. These are the components most individual PMs are responsible for in a product org. At that scale, it's nice to think about the work with a checklist like that.
Each type of risk fits nicely with a different toolbox you have or a privileged interlocutor specialized in clearing that risk. Each feature or job has its arc. You start somewhere along these dimensions, frame the problem you're aiming to solve, and then explore the solution space to minimize these different risks.

## Outro

Part of me wishes I could develop a more unified product management theory, while the other is glad I can't. I think I wouldn't be half as interested if I could. In many respects, managing a product is like addressing any open-ended creative problem. Part art and part science it's about intuiting and common sense because we have yet to figure it out down to its root components. Great squads of determined and thoughtful people build cool things, and this is about setting the ad-hoc stage to support them in the best way you can. Ultimately, I'm just glad I get the chance to do it.
