---
title: "smart kid, bad process"
description: "a sort of resource curse for the cute"
created: 2023-05-13
tags: ["essay", "fragment", "life"]
---

Why are tall men more confident? It's a thing, according to some social science that I presume can't be replicated because really none can. But entertaining this, let's say a few causal links are going on. Let's say tall people are more appreciated socially, seen as more beautiful or impressive, and therefore just perceived as more confident. Or let's say that because they are perceived thus, they probably snowball from early success into a heightened taste for proactive social interactions, leading them to develop these skills more. But you can also imagine a reverse second-order effect: helped by your intrinsic qualities, you probably are not going to ever need to develop a vast swath of skills that others might hone to compensate. A sort of [resource curse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_curse) for the cute.

A question I think about a lot is: what is the equivalent curse for smart people? Smart at large is, I think, overrated. There is an economics and statistical view on this: does intelligence, as finely as we can define and measure it, lead to better life outcomes? I'm not the best person to ask, the answer is not consensual but I think is mostly yes. There is the anecdotal view on this: how can smart people say that much dumb shit and be such trainwrecks sometimes? That I am absolutely qualified to attempt an answer to.

The best way to start talking about is the much-relatable gifted kid story. Gifted kid does well at school, and realizes they can get good grades by putting in 10% of the effort and everything outside of school is more interesting because they can go at their own pace, so they do. Fast forward a few years when they inevitably run into something they want to give a shit about, and fail terribly because they have not acquired any of the prerequisites for self-discipline or hard work. Suddenly, instead of being ahead of the curve for the outsized impact of the smarts during the developmental stage, they're behind the curve for the most important life skills.

I have to be careful about what I mean here. Forcing yourself to care about shit you don't care about isn't the life skill. Being "too scholar" is usually that — the exercise for the exercise's sake, being a teacher's pet. Constraining yourself into a limited space. School as a prison. I assume a lot of the radical education reformists and homeschoolers to be about this: delete these bad parts but keep the relevant ones, the ability to lean into your passions and focus your energy to deliver outcomes.

The importance of this has never been higher: the threat of the era is attention deficit. The enigma here to me is that addictions are sometimes bad and sometimes either adaptive or maladaptive. Becoming a crackhead won't get you anywhere or dead, being addicted to your work might get you a billion-dollar company. What category is being addicted to the infinite information machine of the internet, or even to social networks like Twitter? Smart people used to be the bookish types, stuck in libraries. There was a cap imposed on them by the physical world. Now there is none. What happens now? We have still very early into this. I was born in 1991 and probably of the first cohort of people that got online when they were teenagers, and I have both gratitude and very limited insight into what that has done to me. I assume the infinite firehose of information to be a new way for smart people to shoot themselves in the foot.

Another one: does being smart mean being better at lying to yourself? I think in some sense, yes. I'm not sure about the underlying mechanism, but I think there is some form of self-destructing therapy that smart people love to do to themselves. It's like their executive function is winning against baser instincts that might have been good for them. Externally, too. Let's say a friend is trying to convince you to do something good for you. Let's say you are good at argumenting back and you manage to deflect all their attempts at explaining why. "[Why do humans reason? Just to be right in debates](https://www.dan.sperber.fr/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/MercierSperberWhydohumansreason.pdf)" is a funny infohazard, and I think easily linked to another way of shooting yourself in the foot by being particularly good at blocking reality. Being smart is being able to defend wrong opinions for longer.

Fundamentally, smart people often have bad processes. They can afford it because they're better at coping and at getting decent outcomes with broken practices. I think we have a perpetual blindspot for these types of mechanisms because they seem unactionable at first: I'm not saying being dumb is better for you, just as I wouldn't advise traumatizing your kids to develop their resilience early. What we need is a little bit more humility and consciousness that it's all tradeoffs.
