---
title: "the sweetness of literacy"
description: "a story of catching feelings on twitter and of what it tells me about romance"
created: 2023-06-16
tags: ["love"]
---

gather around for the story of my first time catching feelings for a twitter avatar, a banal affair but one that meant much to me. let's set the scene. it's spring 2023. i had been single for a few months after an uninspiring relationship. in more than one way, my life was in a bit of a rut. the dominant motif: i'm in the middle of a job search, a painful one at that. a general lack of motivation, a downturn market, a lot of rejection, an offer i thought solid that got rescinded last minute. no one should be depressed in spring, but here i was. i had one major strategy to distract myself: i had just started being active on twitter. It finally occurred to me that my 14 year old account could be used for something else than an RSS feed of pointers to interesting writings i'd open once per month.

i'm genuinely mad at my old self for not having had that epiphany earlier, because what immediately followed is a jolt of energy by way of being reminded that there are a lot of cool, unique and fascinating people out there, and that interacting with them is reinvigorating. one person in particular soon stood out. as i would later describe it to a friend: "she only talks about things i care about in a way i agree with and resonates with me a lot". but that was only the beginning. after reading her tweets for a while, i saw more. she had a grace to herself both in her style and her substance, what she said and how she said it. an aristocratic vibe without an ounce of holier-than-thou. never gauche but always signaling sophistication. her writing was incredibly poetic and evocative. i felt like she floated above the world like i like to float above the world, untethered to dumb concerns but capable of descending upon it and being engaged when it matters. she was guarded in a way that didn't feel cold, but that granted everything she said value. she gave things the weight they deserved, judging it accurately, having a savant balance of both levity and gravity when appropriate. she exuded a quiet confidence and maturity i usually am the one to provide to the room, to my eternal disappointment.

quickly, as i got to learn that range, her tweets and bleets became the highlights of my days, progressively making their way into my habits. i started anticipating with glee whatever she'd come up with that day, and dreading the days when no posts came. i cursed my mood for becoming so dependent upon someone else once more. whenever i missed her textual voice, i started searching her old tweets for random keywords i thought she might have said something interesting about. she always did, always beautifully. i liked a few hoping she'd notice. my affection grew as my intuitions were validated. i started randomly dropping references to her writing to my increasingly puzzled offline friends. i felt elated! happy for every single like she gave me like a disgustingly obsequious lapdog (boo!), but also happy for our little dances in the replies where i got to demonstrate that i did indeed get all that she was about. I appreciated each bout of casual chatting and bouncing ideas off each other. it all felt so natural, so sweet and pure. i always enjoy that gentle and lighthearted discovery phase.
never a free lunch though: any moment of awkwardness or any sign of displeasement, particularly completely made up, had me reliving them and torturing myself for hours.

i grasped at anything that made the connection i felt more real and less unidirectional. an early decisive step in that was when she followed me back and liked a few of my tweets. we were, in fact, two people! not me looking at the sun. of course, i gladly took that one little nugget of interest and turned it into a mountain of meaning, just like i had with our previous interactions. i'm ever the enthusiastic optimist, after all. when she liked a few tweets i made about flirting, i was pretty sure we'd get married next week. every little thing was made a symbol.

falling for someone on twitter was an entirely novel thing for me, despite being quite the internet veteran. i got romantically involved before through the cyberspace, but through chat rooms or voice chats where we'd regularly hang out. these conversational mediums are much closer to a plain old regular experience you'd get if you were more of the touching grass kind of dating-person. but i'm a literary-person, i've always loved reading and i've always loved writing. this was me.
the medium was so much better suited to the way i relate to people. it gave me a never-ending stream of small opportunities, invisible to even myself, to notice the details she put in each word, the care by which she constructed her ideas. it gave me a glimpse into her world view, how her brain works, at an extreme depth.
i've never been casual in romance. i'm an idealist, an uncompromising romantic. i want to stare into someone's soul. i do not want anything but that, and from the very beginning. i felt that with her and never would have so soon without the mediation of twitter.
this elation of mine tied back to what i saw in her too: people are too dull, unromantic and pessimistic, she was someone who decisively was not, in a way that mirrors mine and that i yearn for. i want someone who could write what i'm writing now. about me, sure, but i don't mean just that, it's about the ability to see the world with that same lens.

i was well aware of how deluded i sounded for how little we had interacted. a relatively recent capability for me, but one i'm very glad to have gotten wiser about. limerence, my old friend, i'm happy i can give you a name, but i will never forgive the people who genuinely considered putting you in the DSM as an officially registered mental disease. imagine, romeo and juliet as a medical drama! is nothing sacred? a scam! what hate! yet limerence i was in, and with an awkward added layer of parasociality that didn't make it particularly healthier.
connection of this kind was necessarily requited, i would tell myself. there was some reciprocity, i thought and still think. no symmetry, i knew more about her than she about me, but a nascent interest. i didn't lose grounding. i knew exactly the qualities i saw. i could describe the image i had of her in my mind in painful detail, why i had it, why i liked it, and why it was ridiculous that i already had it — all the same. i knew a lot of idealization was going on, i was building a pedestal hundreds of miles high, but i could still see the flaws and the red flags. yes, it was a grounded delusion, silly little fantasies of the earthling variety.

further symptoms of my condition did not wait: i started tweeting an excess of saccharine poetry describing what i wanted to do with her and what she made me feel, probably subconsciously hoping she'd pick up the clues and instantly fall in love with me because of my amazing way with words.
i made a portrait of my ideal partner in the middle of this whole affair. i looked at it and realized in dread that it was just a list of her traits. how deep in the tank was i? was i actually grounded? i combed my old journals in search of another similar list i had made years earlier, before i knew she existed (why did i wait?): it was about the same list. i did have consistency and clarity, after all.  
Yes, i was building an image of her, a perception, a mirage, a placeholder, as one always does at that stage. But it was the most accurate I had ever painted that quickly, by sole virtue of the medium. I can glean so much more through these small units of asynchronous text shouted to the world than i can elsewhere. twitter was powerful. still having no idea what she looks like or if we'd be physically attracted to each other, i feel connected to her in a way that truly matters to me. i peered at deep traits of the most illegible kind it would otherwise take me arduous efforts to identify.

What this story lacks is a satisfying ending. i resolved to make a first step and made attempts at reaching out privately to build real rapport, with the best of the lame excuses i could muster, worried as i was to stay in this weird parasocial limbo. i got back cold shoulders and then an inadmissibility claim for my romantic overtures, on account of her heart being otherwise busy with someone else. it was an elegant rejection that felt warm and soft, so measured and empathic, exactly what i expected from her (and making me want her even more, of course).
it also made me feeling jealous and envious, which i hate, but i truly hope she'll be happy there. it is easier for me to accept it that way, it doesn't say anything about me, or me+her. deep connection or not, sometimes events line up in a way that can only make you say "i wish everything would have been slightly different". i hope we'll stay in touch and can get to know each other better over time. i value this kind of connection in friendship only slightly less than in romance. i want to find out what is behind that gravity pull i felt. a lot of it will ride, i'm sure, on my ability to Not Make It Weird.
according to my journal, this whole thing at its peak had gone on for merely a little more than a month and a half. a flash. the sum total of our interactions was ridiculously small. i'm not over it yet, the disappointment and feeling of unfairness as the fantasies fade out are still wrecking my brain. I'll miss it but this, too, shall pass.
so onto the bigger things: what is there to persist, what lessons can i draw from this?

the starting question goes: is it possible (you dumbo), at 31, to discover that you've been crushing and pre-dating wrong this whole time?
something i have worked for and pride myself on being clear on are my motives. i have worked on the why a decent bit. In romance, i bombastically declare, I know what I want, what my goal is. I want a partnership and a strong commitment, for which i have clear expectations. the fantasy of a couple of 80y old holding on to each other as if they were teenagers, propped by decades of intimacy building. I think I know what qualities are needed in a partner for her to work with me, what we need to be aligned on, and what I can offer her. I had a few relationships that came tantalizingly close to realizing it. But looking back at it now, right in the middle of having caught these feelings for Her, it felt like the way i've been trying to get to it, the how and not the why, how to select for what i want, to direct my early pre-dating feelings, is all wrong.
i would have wanted to go into these relationships having read their twitter feed and played around with them in games of wordy wits for months and months before anything happened. I want nothing short than to see their literary brain on display, talking about everything from daily life to big ideas however they see fit. I want to see them cute short stories. The way they use their words and what they choose to talk about in a free environnement tells me everything I need to know. Why am i running into friends of friends at a party, colleagues at work, strangers met serendipitously, going on a few dates and hoping it will work out? how barbaric, how inefficient!
I tweeted this as a joke somewhere in the process of getting to know Her: "first date idea: we like each other's tweets for 12-18 months with no other interactions". reader, a freudian moment that was: this isn't a joke at all, and this might not be just an idea.

Let me reclaim something first. People think they're deluding themselves with limerence scenarios, but the truth is, it's way easier to delude yourself once you are in a relationship that doesn't meet your ideals, that you should know won't be enough for you. you can always settle down, renounce your ideals, and accept it for what it is. but usually it's not a conscious process.
Relationships can provide you with enough silk to weave a scarf of post-hoc rationals to convince yourself to stay in what should be an obvious lost cause. It's one thing to enjoy someone's company enough to hang on to them, it's something else entirely to catch their essence and if they are someone you see yourself growing old with. What if these were easier to do from the get-go, before anything much happens? Why not raise your expectations for that phase of flirting and yearning?
In the middle of all of my fantasizing, all my reading her wonderful prose, all the pull I felt intermingling with the superficial chitchat we had together, despite all of that, i knew perfectly well where i stood and what was real: not much yet, a plot of empty land. just a glimpse of a connection and what could be, a strong match, something worth pursuing and building an house upon. I can imagine a world where we build a true partnership like the one i want. it's something necessary, not sufficient.
for building the house is still the hard part. love is grown and cultivated, borne out over time from true commitment, emerging from repeated exposure to small acts of kindness and trust. what i had felt was an impulse in me strong enough to carry out such a commitment. and here is the kicker: it is something i have struggled with and failed to articulate multiple times while in relationships i would have otherwise told you were perfectly healthy and promising, lulled by the comfort of it and completely fooling myself. and here i was having it already. the way i had been doing things in these relationships did not yield the proper amount of feelings megatons i need to catapult me into a strong relationship of the kind i want, doesn't motivate me to bestow the appropriate amount of value to this work of two. the initial kick of crushes and limerence i always had, but that was not good enough, but here it felt like it would have been, because of the medium. the image i built made me feel strongly enough to want to substitute it for the real thing.

This sense of having a connection with my admiree that shall not be named is as real as anything, the feelings as worthy as something more tangible and concrete. I'll proudly stand by them, despite how ridiculous it sounds to feel so strongly and powerfully about someone you know only through something seemingly so superficial. it is still The Thing. this is the seed by which you kickstart a true relationship building that will stand the ages. you take the pedestalling, you turn that into long lasting energy. love is mutual bestowal of value; feelings that strong are inherently valuable because they are what allow you to bestow. don't put that on the DSM, please.

watching someone expose their brain in intricate feats of creative writing to all, being able to scroll back through months of them doing just that, doing some improv with them in the replies.. the whole has a unique quality, more than the whole of dates and boring conversations and conventional texting and whatever else i had been up to. it Just Works. it's something i need to build my partner seeking around, i want to pursue that as a prerequisite somehow. if i am to find the one, and i will find Her i have no doubt, i need to remember how i feel right now and pursue that precise feeling.

what to make of this? the practicalities of it all are not obvious. i don't really feel like that about anyone else on twitter, among all these brains-on-display i've looked at. i'll keep hanging out there for sure, i like the people, and this little story i just told is fantastic motivation. but what i described here is raising the bar, i think i can trick myself into dating superficially 100 times more people than i can deeply admire after reading a few hundreds of their earnest tweets. of course! but now i want to do the second thing. no, i must! and i already thought myself selective, the club of people able to fascinate me so small. reader, how can i make serendipity join my side on this one? how do i tilt the scales back? how do i open the path?
